# Mitigating-Echo-chamber-Issue-in-Movie-Recommendations

## Recommendation System
The immense amount of data available in the huge digital world of the 21st century is both an advantage and a challenge. As we have a large amount of data in our hand, it will be hard to filter out the important and essential data from the ocean of data available. The availability of huge amounts of data, known as information overload, has resulted in the development of systems that can filter the data and produce choices that are specific to the user preferences. This is where the Recommender Systems comes into play.

The Recommendation system is an advanced software tools and applications, designed to provide customised recommendations to the user. From choosing which book to read, movie to watch, or a product to buy, the recommendation systems are important in introducing users toward choices that will suit their requirements and preferences. Like most of the technologies, recommendation systems too have few challenges. One of the important issues is the “Echo Chamber” or “Filter Bubble” issue, where users get recommended with the contents that is very similar with the contents that they have already consumed. This leads to very limited perspective and exposure to different contents.

## Movie Recommendation System
In today’s world of digital streaming, where a huge amount of data is available in our hands, the main challenge is not just to recommend contents, but also to recommend contents that match with the user’s preference. The Movie recommendation was developed to solve this challenge, which recommends movies related to their tastes. The movie recommendation system works based on two main parts: users and items. The main objective of the system is to predict the user’s rating or preference for a movie. This system is used in the movie streaming platforms like Netflix and Amazon Prime to make sure that the users are very well engaged with the contents and spend more time on the platform, which will increase the platform’s revenue.

## Echo Chamber Issue
The term “Echo Chamber” is not completely new, but the effects of the issue in the modern world, particularly in the recommendation system, have caused major issues. Echo chamber is a situation where certain ideas, beliefs, and data are developed and reinforced repeatedly in a system, which restricts the opposing ideas and data. In the real world, this echo chamber issue makes people only interact with ideas that only support their existing beliefs, avoiding the opposing ideas. This issue is very obvious in the movie recommendation system, where the user gets recommended with the films that are very similar to the contents that they have already watched, which restricts their exposure to the new genre and diverse contents. In the movie recommendation system, the algorithms that only consider user history and preferences to make recommendations are the cause for the echo chamber issue. The main idea of these algorithms is to provide personalised recommendations that aligns with the user’s taste, but by recommending similar contents unintentionally they create the echo chamber issue. 


# The main aim of the project is to address and mitigate the echo chamber issue in the movie recommendation system 

For mitigating the echo chamber issue in the movie recommendation at first, we’ve to build a basic movie recommendation system. For building a recommender system the MovieLens 25 million dataset is chosen. This dataset is often known as ML-25M dataset. ML-25M is one of the largest and most used datasets for building a movie recommendation system. To make sure our system mitigates the echo chamber effect in the movie recommendation system, various models have used. The main goal of our system to provide users more accurate and diverse recommendations. To address the echo chamber issue, the system uses combination of content-based, collaborative, Singular Value Decomposition(SVD) and hybrid models.

As all the models used before in the system will not mitigate the echo chamber issue when performed alone, the hybrid models are created. The Hybrid models in the system combine the strengths of different models used before in the system. The system has four different combination of hybrid models with different logics implemented in them, to increase its potential of mitigating the echo chamber issue.


